---
title: Chemo round 2 recap
guid: http://www.chemolog.com/?p=99
date: 2018-09-07 18:46:30 -0700
author: ariakerstein
layout: single
categories:
  - chemotherapy
---

Round 2 was fairly smooth. Ate a massive lunch when I got home. Slept really well the past 2 nights. Got up early this morning for a light workout today. This is likely the prednisone talking but I feel more ok than expected so far. 
First off it was faster - 3 hours, not 6. 
This was mainly due to the fact that the Rituxin infusion started off at a fast rate. On the first infusion the nurses needed to verify that there's no strong reaction, so they started me off slow, 50 mg/hr, incrementing by 50mg/hr each 30 minutes, ending at something like 350mg/hr. This time we jumped straight to 400mg+. Also we skipped the benadryl IV since I had no reaction last time. I took plain zyrtec in the morning and started back on the 100mg prednisone. We jumped right in. 
Fun with process improvement
My infusion nurse and I have developed an interesting relationship. She pesters me about not going to the “chemo class” (despite that I repeatedly demonstrate I’ve memorized the .pdf when she quizzes me, but she's a stickler). In return I get to frustrate her with detailed oncology questions she can't answer. To her major credit she is honest enough to tell me when she doesn't know something. And she’s curious enough to want to find out the answer once the question is posed. More than once she’s gone to research the answer with colleagues, or pull in a doctor/oncologist to come discuss with me - which has been fun. 
While satisfying for my innate curiousity, there’s a deeper reason for this. In medicine, probably more than most fields, the difference between a positive and a poor outcome is often the result of a single decision, or a mere 2mm movement in the wrong direction. If I’m paranoid about anything it’s in my insistence that the practiconer can to a reasonable degree explain to me the rationale for their decisions. One wrong move can quickly result in a cascade of downstream effects leading to permanent injury or death. Trust but verify. Anyway I’ve seen first hand how one small issue can derail treatments & outcomes. I saw this with my neutropenic event a few weeks ago. I would have taken more precautions had they bothered to measure my labs earlier. They don’t because only a small minority of patients in my demographic get this severly compromised (<10%). Had I pushed for it they would have run the test - so they’ll do that moving forward now that we’ve established I’m not “average”, but only because I’m pushing.
A few other top of mind examples: 
	•	My grandfather Nathaniel Sugerman, a man I admired immensely, died young after heart surgery when he was in his early 60’s, and I was just 12. The surgery was successful but he developed what I understand was a preventable infection from a tube in his throat. This ended up killing him. 
	•	My father had what was supposed to be a routine surgery for acid reflux. In the process the surgeon damaged his vegas nerve, forcing him into an early retirement. He will likely never recover his energy levels or ability to properly digest food. After most meals he needs to lay down. 
A key distinction that I'm drawing lately is that of the practice of medicine vs. the medicine itself. These drugs I'm getting are a reflection of what humanity can do when at it’s best - which is to literally save lives. Absent this treatment, and going solely based on the statistics I should be dead in six to twelve months. Therefore I will owe my days beyond that horizon to these drugs. While we’re here let’s put a date on it: I would have died on March 1, 2019. I owe my life to the uncountable anonymous hours of basic science, research and discovery born from the commitment to make life better. It’s humbling. And it makes me keenly aware of how our survival, as individuals, as a species, is a function of our interconnectedness. 
I figure while I’m receiving medical attention the least I can do is try to fix some issues I’ve been experiencing - pay it forward and maybe improve something for the next person. 
For example, so far:
	•	Nutrition - I'm fighting weight loss and hyper vigilant about not getting below 140 lbs. When I was admitted to the hospital they put me on a “neutropenic” diet but the food they were giving me was truly un-edible and low in calories. The only food I could get down was canned syrupy peaches. After a few meals I told them to skip everything else and just bring that “6 cans of it - bring me as much as you’ve got”. Maybe I’ll beat cancer with pure sugar - that’ll make a great paper! Anyway I was lucky in having awesome friends/wife smuggle me food (canned sardines, sandwiches, salads, fruits) - not everyone is so lucky. So while I was getting infused I was asking the nurse is there really any evidence for this diet they had me on? Seems kind of outdated/unsubstantiated when I read the white papers… The nurse was surprised they still were doing this and agreed. So she brought my question to the head of programming (or something, I can't keep the titles straight) who has been there over 20 years to discuss with me. Turns out she was at a symposium a few months ago in which this very topic was discussed. She was also surprised Kiaser was still were following this outdated practice. Apart from not eating raw fish/meat and washing vegetables well there is no other convincing data that it supports better outcomes for this case. So she is now updating the guidelines and protocols. Progress! Hopefully the next person in this situation won't have to deal with this (and I hope that person isn’t me).
	•	New resident bedside manner. Turns out my episode in the ER coincided with the first year resident trainings. By the way my thumb is still swollen with lack of full mobility and numbness from a minor lancing procedure. So the pushback I was experiencing in the ER was very likely a case of first-year resident bravado/ego. I filed formal feedback with Kaiser and one of the managers will also discuss this with the head of the resident program (likely this will go nowhere but who knows). Maybe it'll help them at least be aware of the issue and tone down this kind of behavior in the future.

Some good news from the Oncologist
My oncologist came by to the chair for a visit. He felt my abdomen and was somewhat taken aback at how much the tumor had shrunk after a single treatment, noting it was quite a lot smaller than he would have expected. So he is pushing the mid-way checkpoint from after the 3rd, to after the 4th infusion owing to his confidence in the treatment protocol I’m on. That said I can't believe how far off that still feels!
And friends who sat with me
Did you know you can sit with people as they get infused? It’s a pretty intimate experience to be there with loved ones while you get pumped full of poisons. At one point when they were infusing doxorubicin, aka red death, my friend Mike reached out to hold my hand. It was appropriate given my obvious wincing and shifting in my seat when they brought it out. Mind you none of this really hurt physically - more of an eerie coldness flowing through the veins as they manually infuse at a slow rate of no more than 5ml/minute. My squirming really came from the knowledge of what’s happening at the molecular level. Yes, I was visualizing the drug inhibiting topoisomerase action and hence promoting DNA double-strand breaks. Essentially how these drugs work is by stopping these enzymes that are responsible for running along the DNA helix to support replication. So the result is dividing cells get programmed to die. Butterflies, rainbows and happy thoughts don’t really work for me. Anyway I got through it - pic below. 
Also I had Michelle and Sean take turns sitting in the single chair next to me the room could accommodate. I’m sure it would have turned into a raucus party but the nurses weren’t into that. 
At one point Sean turns to me, remarking that scenes like this one are where superheroes are born (think Marvel comics, e.g., Deadpool, though I haven’t seen it and hear I don’t want to - until this is over).
… in a normal Wednesday in San Francisco… a cancer infusion center, sits a normal looking bald guy. He’s tense, and they’re infusing him with some crazy red concoction…THEN ONE DAY…
So I guess we’ll soon find out what this serum is actually made of once I’m past all this. Hmm, what will be my superpower??
