---
title: 'Why Run'
date: 2020-05-20
author: ariakerstein
layout: single
permalink: /why-run/
categories:
  - Essays
---

My aim is not to convince you to run. If you're looking for inspiration go elsewhere. This is meant to describe my own personal motivations and thoughts around running. 
I am not a special runner. I'm a strong amateur. I've won a few small races or placed top 10, all at the half-marathon to marathon distance. I've qualified for the Boston marathon 4 times and run it 3. 

I started relatively late. I think I was in my early to mid 20s. There was one run I remember that hooked me. It was a mile repeat. This was with a Brown University cross-country club. The coach saw me wrapping up a run and must have thought I looked like a runner (I kind of do). He asked if I was up for doing 2 x 1 mile repeats. Sure. Well my body hadn't ever felt something this purley difficult. But it was targeted. 

Running is, for me at least, the means to altering my mind state at any
given time. We often think of exercise, running, as endeavors of the body –
they are to an extent – but I think this is secondary to the cultivation of a
mind’s control over its body. In a way the marathon is a reduced game whereby
the desires of body (stop, damnit!) versus those of mind (go!) can duel. The event is simple as it is profound; we tend to see the
races between people, but the interesting part remains subsurface.  But the
complexity of electric thoughts mixing in the cauldron of pressure and doubt
are far too complex to manifest in blunt limbs and rubber faces to the world.
No, such things are destined to inner confinement. 